+++
title = "In-person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "June 6, 2018 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "CVPIA SIT"
  weight = 3
+++

## June 6, 2018 [Slides](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cvpia-meeting-slides/June+6+2018+SIT+meeting.pdf)

## Participants:
Cesar Blanco, Robyn Bilski, Brett Harvey, Ammon Danielson, Doug Killam, Corey Phillis, Lisa Hunt, Flora Cordoleani, Russ Perry, Chris Hammersmark, Matt Brown, JD Wikert, Felipe Carrillo, Mike Urkov, Rod Wittler, Shane Abeare, Jim Peterson, Adam Duarte

## Update on integrated model

Feedback:

- Spawning habitat vs. trap location Check all the tributaries to make sure there is not a spatial mismatch (i.e., trap is upstream of habitat data)
- Look at total minutes within a month for proportion month monitored. Is there a minimum effectiveness? That is, if the trap is only open for 2 hours is it still effective? Matt said it might average itself it out.
- Contact Jason Kindopp for information on Feather River RST data
- Doug said that a fish was classified as dying before spawning if eggs were in the female and tail wasn&#39;t worn out. He has data from the Sacramento that we could correlate with Clear Creek to fill in missing data (if a correlation exists).
- JD said temperature and relative number of fish are usually correlated with pre-spawn mortality.
- Check to make sure traps were running across the entire day, not just in morning or night.
- Egg-to-fry survival –\&gt; Chris used a deterministic function for temperature on a given day, so no error/uncertainty associated with this estimate.
- Shane will contact Tuolomne folks about how long traps were open.

## Next steps for Chinook

Adam gave an update on the overall Chinook efforts. There are more than a few things that will be on hold till contract issues are resolved.

## Update on O. mykiss DSM

Feedback:

- Matt said they have 10 years of invertebrate data on the Clear Creek.
- Antelope, Deer, and Mill Redd counts: Doug said they don&#39;t have trout redd counts consistently because of the flooding during that time year (February through May). He doesn&#39;t believe those data are available past 2001. Travis will send Doug a list of unmet data needs
- Matt said he sent timing information to Doug&#39;s office and they have this information for most of the upper Sac tributaries.

## Update on proposals outstanding

- **Habitat decay**
  - Draft proposal was distributed to SIT. Shane has started to coordinate a meeting to refine this proposal.
- **Ocean survival**
  - We will contact Will to see if he can present at the next in-person meeting.
- **Food for fish**
  - Brett developed a draft proposal for wetlands and this was distributed to SIT. This was not coordinated with Rene to consider rice fields. Shane will coordinate a subgroup for this (with Rod, Brett, and Rene). Rod will send out material that have been published on rice fields.

## New business

The Core Team is meeting on Friday to review charters that were selected last year but not funded, additional proposals that were not considered, etc. to (hopefully) come to a final list that they may be able to share with the SIT.


## Marching Orders

Adam

- Check all the tributaries to make sure there is not a spatial mismatch in habitat area and trap location (i.e., is the trap upstream of the estimated habitat data?)
- Contact Jason Kindopp for information on Feather River RST data
- Contact Doug for data from the Sacramento that we could correlate with Clear Creek to fill in missing data.
- Contact Will to see if he can present at next in-person meeting

Shane

- Contact Tuolomne folks about how long traps were open.
- Coordinate meetings for habitat decay and food for fish proposals

Jim

- Contact Matt for invertebrate data on the Clear Creek.
- Send Doug a list of unmet O. mykiss data needs and timing in upper Sac tributaries